# The inference_tools repository
This package aims to provide a set of python-based tools for Bayesian data analysis
which are simple to use, allowing them to applied quickly and easily.

The package documentation can be found in `/docs/inference_tools_documentation.pdf`. This documentation contains full
descriptions of all available classes (and their methods), but does not yet contain detailed code examples of how
to use these classes.

For example code, instead see the /demos/ folder which contains a demonstration code for every available class,
including detailed comments.

Requests for features/improvements can be made via the issue tracker. If you have questions
or are interested in getting involved with the development of this package, please contact
me at `chris.bowman@york.ac.uk`.

## modules

### mcmc
This module is designed to provide Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) samplers which can
be easily applied to inference problems.

**GibbsChain**  
Gibbs samping is implemented as the GibbsChain class. This implementation is self-tuning, such that detailed knowledge of the PDF
being sampled is not required in order for the algorithm to work efficiently.

Demonstrations of how to use the GibbsChain class can be found in `/demos/GibbsChain_demo.py` and
`/demos/spectroscopy_demo.py`

**HamiltonianChain**
Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo (HMC) is an algorithm where proposed steps are generated by integrating Hamilton's equations,
treating the negative posterior log-probability as a scalar potential. In order to do this, the algorithm
requires the gradient of the log-posterior. Assuming this gradient can be calculated efficiently, HMC deals well
with strongly correlated variables and scales favourably to higher-dimensionality problems.

This implementation automatically selects an appropriate time-step for the Hamiltonian dynamics simulation, but
does not currently automatically select an appropriate number of time-steps to take. We would like to add this
functionality in the future, for example by implementing the NUTS algorithm.

Demonstrations of how to use the HamiltonianChain class can be found in ``/demos/HamiltonianChain_demo.py``


### gp_tools
This module provides implementations of some useful applications of 'Gaussian processes'.
This involves modelling data through multivariate normal distributions where the
covariance of any two points is defined by the 'distance' between them in some arbitrary
space.

**GpRegressor**  
Gaussian-process regression has been implemented as the GpRegressor class, and can fit data which is
arbitrarily spaced (i.e. non-gridded) in any number of dimensions. A key advantage this
technique holds over other regression methods is its ability to properly account for
errors on the data and provide a corresponding error on the regression estimate.

A demonstration of how to use the GpRegressor class can be found in `/demos/GpRegressor_demo.py`

**GpOptimiser**  
Bounded global optimisation using gaussian-process regression has been implemented through the GpOptimiser class.
This algorithm, often referred to as "Bayesian optimisation" specifically suited to problems where a single evaluation
of the function which is to be maximised is very expensive, such that the total number of evaluations must be minimised.

A demonstration of how to use the GpOptimiser class can be found in ``/demos/GpOptimiser_demo.py``

### pdf_tools
This module provides tools for reconstructing the probability density function from which
a given set of samples was drawn.

**UnimodalPdf**
UnimodalPdf provides smooth estimates of univariate, unimodal PDFs by fitting an extremely flexible
parametric model to a given set of sample data. The class also provides a method which returns the
credible interval for a chosen percentile.

A demonstration of how to use the UnimodalPdf class can be found in `/demos/UnimodalPdf_demo.py`

**GaussianKDE**
The GaussianKDE class provides an estimate of a univariate PDF for a given set of sample data using
Gaussian kernel density estimation. An estimate of the mode is calulated automatically, and like
UnimodalPdf, the credible interval for a given percentile is available through a method call.

A demonstration of how to use the UnimodalPdf class can be found in `/demos/GaussianKDE_demo.py`